The Justice Department is studying a proposal
that would allow authorities to summarily exclude aliens seeking
political asylum without giving them a hearing before an
immigration judge, officials said Thursday.
   Under a plan drafted by the Immigration and Naturalization
Service, specially trained INS hearing officers would conduct
informal proceedings to consider an alien's claim for asylum status.
   One critic of the proposal said it would ``obliterate fairness
and due process'' for asylum seekers that is now provided by
immigration law.
   The proposal, which is still under study, would ``provide for
summary exclusion of aliens who seek asylum at ports of entry who
fail to make a credible showing'' of eligibility, according to an
internal Justice Department analysis of the plan.
   ``This should discourage those who are claiming asylum, but in
fact have no legitimate right to this status, from attempting to
enter the United States under this claim,'' according to the
document.
   People seeking asylum must demonstrate a ``well-founded fear of
persecution'' for a variety of factors, including ethnic background
and political or religious beliefs.
   The proposal to amend current immigration law would require
approval by Congress.
   It was drafted by INS in the wake of the flood of Central
Americans crossing the border from Mexico into Texas over the last
10 months.
   Most were denied political asylum on the ground that they were
fleeing poverty, not political persecution.
   Gregory J. Leo, director of legislative affairs for INS, said
the proposal was in an ``early stage of review.''
   He described the plan as a ``legislative proposal that has been
generated at a staff level'' and circulated to various divisions of
the Justice Department, including the office of Attorney General
Dick Thornburgh.
 It was drafted as a possible solution to the ``misuse or abuse
of the asylum process'' by Central Americans who come to the border
without a legal claim for political asylum status, Leo said.
   ``The present system allows an alien to make successive
applications to the district (INS) director and to an immigration
judge, leading to a time-consuming process,'' the department's
analysis said.
   An adverse ruling by the immigration judge can be appealed to
the Board of Immigration Appeals and thence to federal circuit
courts of appeal _ a process that could extend an alien's stay for
many months.
   The draft proposal would eliminate the hearing mechanism for
aliens at ports of entry who are denied political asylum.
   ``There are people who would use the asylum process as a means
of staying here even though they are not qualified,'' Leo said.
   But Arthur C. Helton, director of the political asylum project
of the non-profit Lawyers Committee for Human Rights, said the plan
would ``obliterate fairness and due process for most asylum
seekers.''
   ``This would be a very serious attack on asylum'' as a means of
entering the country, he said.
   ``It would affect thousands of people arriving at the border,''
Helton said.
   In the 1988 fiscal year, 60,000 people sought asylum and if
current rates continue the total for the current year will be more
than 100,000, Helton said.
   The draft legislation also contains a provision that would
increase by 5,000 the number of refugee visas that would be granted
in the 1989 fiscal year for aliens from Central American nations.
   Anyone seeking refugee status must apply in their own country.
By increasing the number of visas by 5,000 authorities hope to
encourage Central Americans to apply at U.S. embassies in their
home countries, according to the draft.
   INS is currently authorized to admit 3,500 eligible refugees
from Central America in the current fiscal year.
   The INS proposal would abolish the right of aliens pressing
claims at immigration-court hearings to be represented by an
attorney. When an alien is examined by an INS officer, an attorney
could act as an adviser but could not be an advocate, presenting
evidence.
   ``The officer's determination would be administratively final''
but could be overruled by the attorney general or the INS
commissioner, the proposal said.
   The influx of refugees from Central America across the Texas
border over the last 10 months prompted INS to set up a detention
facility for people awaiting immigration court hearings.
   On Wednesday, 2,150 refugees were being detained at the INS
facility in Port Isabel, Texas. A total of 4,340 refugees were
being detained at various INS locations in Texas, the agency said.
   Aliens denied political aslyum are given the choice of returning
to Mexico of facing detention while they await the outcome of
immigration court proceedings.
   The crisis stemmed from an upsurge in asylum applications at the
border crossing from the normal monthly total of about 400 to 5,000
a month between June 1988 and Feb. 1.The flow was reduced after INS imposed emergency procedures,
enabling one-day processing of asylum applications at Port Isabel.
   The proposal would also eliminate the right to apply for
political asylum at any point during a deportation proceeding.
Aliens would be required to file a notice of intent to file such an
application two weeks after the start of deportation proceedings.
   The applicant would then have another 30 days to file the papers.
   If the deadlines were missed, a political asylum claim would be
allowed only if the alien showed ``changed circumstances'' in his
home country would make him qualified.

