A private environmental group contends in a new
report that preschool children are consuming cancer-causing
chemicals in fruits and vegetables at levels that expose them to
health risks many times greater than the government considers safe.
   The findings by the Natural Resources Defense Council were
immediately challenged by the Environmental Protection Agency, which
said in a statement Friday that health risks to children are taken
into account when setting allowable chemical residue levels.
   The Natural Resources Defense Council, a group specializing in
environmental and health matters that has criticized government
policy in numerous areas, is scheduled to announce its findings at a
news conference Monday. An executive summary of the report was
obtained Friday by The Associated Press.
   Janet Hathaway, one of the authors, declined to comment on the
two-year study except to say, ``Our work definitively shows there is
a greatly increased risk to children from chemicals in their diets.''
   The study, according to the summary, concludes that preschoolers
are at an increased risk because they consume many times more in
fruits and vegetables than adults relative to their weight and are
more vulnerable to the effects of toxic chemicals.
   The summary said the authors had concluded, after analyzing
consumption data and allowable residues of eight carcinogenic
chemicals on 27 fruits and vegetables, that as many as 5,500 to
6,200 youngsters among the current population of preschoolers ``may
eventually get cancer solely as a result of their exposure (to the
chemicals) before six years of age.''
   This represents, the report continued, a risk of at least five
people in 20,000 getting cancer because of their exposure before the
age of 6 years, much higher than the one in one million considered
allowable by the EPA in its risk analysis formula.
   Critics of the study said it raises false fears among parents.
   ``It's voodoo statistics. This has nothing to do with the
realities of disease,'' said Dr. Elizabeth Whelan, executive
director of the American Council on Science and Health.
   There ``is no evidence of even one case of human cancer in
children and adults being linked to exposure to the minute pesticide
residues in food,'' said Dr. Whelan in a telephone interview. She
maintained there are greater health risks in not using the
pesticides.
   The environmental group's study concludes that the typical
preschooler receives four times greater exposure on average than
adult women to eight carcinogenic pesticides the group evaluated and
that in some cases the increased exposure is as much as 18 times
that of adults.
   ``Our nation's children are being harmed by the very fruits and
vegetables we tell them will make them grow up healthy and strong,''
concludes the report summary.
   The group's conclusions were based on fruit and vegetable
consumption figures from the Agriculture Department and on levels of
pesticide residues found on 27 fruits and vegetables according to
the Food and Drug Administration and the EPA, the study said.
   Preschoolers eat six times as much fruit in general, seven times
as much grapes, apples and apple sauce and 18 times as much apple
juice as an adult, the study said. It said that half of all fruits
sampled by the FDA in 1987 ``had detectable levels of pesticides.''
   In a statement, the EPA said the agency ``is concerned about
potentially higher pesticide exposure to children and infants,'' but
that it takes those concerns into account when determining levels of
pesticides that are allowed on food.
   John Moore, acting EPA deputy administrator, said in an
interview, however, that the agency does not agree with some of its
critics that it should across the board ``add another potency factor
in addition to what we use to accommodate the fact that kids are
exposed more'' to certain foods containing some level of pesticides.
   He added that the agency's chemical tolerance levels for fruits
and vegetables ``is designed to protect the average person against
any short or long-term harmful effects that might result from an
entire lifetime of exposure to pesticide residues in food, including
exposure during childhood.''
   The private group's study saw exposure to daminozide, a growth
regulator, as posing the greatest risk to children among the
carcinogenic chemicals they examined with a potential cancer risk to
preschoolers of 1 case in every 4,200 people exposed. The EPA
recently said it plans to order the product, which is used on
apples, off the market and the producers of processed apple products
have said for the most part it is no longer is being used by their
industry.
