Breaking into the lucrative Japanese market isn't
impossible, but it isn't easy, either. Consider Snickers.
   For Mars Co., putting Snickers, Mars bars and M&amp;M's within reach
of Japanese consumers required ``a mind-boggling expenditure of
time and money,'' said Kiyoshi Ide, senior managing director of
Mars' Japanese subsidiary, Master Foods KK.
   The breakthrough also required an alliance with one of Japan's
giant trading companies. Mars leaped over Japan's formidable
barriers by using Mitsubishi Corp.'s extensive contacts to place
its candy bars at subway kiosks and in grocery stores.
   Mars began selling candy in Japan in 1987. While the company
won't divulge sales figures, it said surveys show Snickers' share
of the chocolate bar market is growing, from its small base, faster
than that of any other brand.
   Foreign companies attempting to sell in Japan have to hurdle
government barriers _ including murky rules and regulations, import
duties, fair trade price laws that limit sales promotion
activities, and complex import procedures.
   But the maze-like distribution system _ rigidly controlled by
wholesalers _ is a particular hindrance to importers because it
typically increases prices up to four times after Japanese
distributors add on their markups.
   For ``status'' products, the climb is even steeper. The
wholesale price of a bottle of Hennessy's VSOP cognac is $7, but by
the time it hits store shelves it is $77.50.
   Consider the imported necktie: $28 to the import agent, who
sells it to a wholesaler for $56, who sells it to a department
store for $70, which displays it beautifully and gets $112 from the
customer.
   The distribution system is under scrutiny by Japanese and U.S.
trade negotiators in talks on the two nations' structural barriers
to trade.
   Simply finding someone to distribute new products in Japan often
is impossible because of exclusive, longstanding relationships
between wholesalers and retailers. Sole import agents, although
easier to find, limit a product's sales.
   Amway Corp., the American direct-sales company, is doing a
booming business here. Its secret? It imported its own distribution
system.
   The company offers household items, toiletries and cookware
through its network of 500,000 Japanese distributors who sell
through personal contacts from their homes. A phone call to one of
Amway's three modern distribution centers will produce an item
within 72 hours, says Peter Scacco of Amway.
   Amway is the fastest-growing foreign company in Japan, according
to a study by the Nomura Research Institute, with sales of more
than half a billion dollars last year.
   Tiffany and Co. boosted its Japanese sales 38 percent last year,
working through the equally upscale Mitsukoshi Ltd. as its sole
distributor.
   Blue Diamond Growers, sellers of California almonds, broke into
the market after 15 years by piggybacking onto Coca-Cola Japan's
independent distributors, which deal with 1.2 million outlets.
   BMW got around the astronomical price of land for car lots by
seeking out people who owned land where dealerships could be set
up, then training the landowners to be dealers. Riding a
consumption binge, the West German automaker is approaching its
target of 1 percent of the car market.
   U.S. executives in Japan concluded in a recent study that new
companies, whether foreign or domestic, are the targets of a kind
of in-bred discrimination.
 ``Even a Japanese company with a new product has trouble
penetrating the Japanese distribution system,'' said William Best
of the management consulting firm A.T. Kearney International, who
headed the study by the American Chamber of Commerce in Japan.
   Because the Japanese put so much stock in powerful companies
with famous names, wholesalers and retailers are uncomfortable with
fledgling enterprises.
   ``Without name recognition, it is very difficult to get
wholesalers to accept your products into the distribution system
and to get retailers to put them on the shelves,'' Best said.
``Just because you're unknown, you won't get the kind of
opportunity you would get in the United States market.''
   Best said the U.S. government and Japanese leaders face an
uphill battle in trying to change the way people think about
business relationships.
   ``These attitudes can't be legislated away,'' Best says.
   But some changes loom. Recent trends include retailers importing
directly from U.S. suppliers, and ``development imports.''
   Development imports _ custom products for which materials,
quality levels, design and processing methods are specified by
Japanese companies that then import the finished products into
Japan _ are among supermarket chain Jusco Co. Ltd.'s most common
type of import, says Chikashi Honma, general manager of the
international merchandising division at Jusco.
   Issetan, an elegant department store, is also creating
private-label products this way. Analysts say this trend will
continue because the goods can be sold cheaper than domestic
products.
   ``There are a number of new channels and smart U.S. businessmen
will do the market research to find the right distribution
network,'' says one analyst.
