The Environmental Protection Agency says the
hunt to find substitutes for ozone-depleting chemicals will go much
quicker without strict government regulation of the chemical
industry.
   EPA spokesman Chris Rice said the agency's policy is voluntary
cooperation _ instead of strong government control _ because EPA
has received ``excellent cooperation'' from the industry.
   Rice was reacting to a recent General Accounting Office report
that concluded the EPA's policy is failing to ensure the safe
testing of chemicals that will take the place of
chlorofluorocarbons, or CFC's.
   By not starting the lengthy regulation process now, EPA will
find itself unable to quickly restrict use of many substitutes
shown to endanger human health and the environment, the GAO said.
   The GAO, Congress' investigative agency, said EPA should use its
powers to demand unpublished test results and quickly slap controls
on substitutes believed to endanger the environment or humans.
   The United States and the 12-nation European Community have
pledged to ban chlorofluorocarbons by 1999 _ surpassing the goals
of the 1987 Montreal Protocol which requires they be halved by the
end of the century.
   CFC's, and related chemicals called halons, are stable and
non-toxic when released into the atmosphere, but 10 to 100 years
later, when they rise 15-20 miles to the stratosphere, their
chemical bonds are broken apart.
   Scientists say their chlorine atoms destroy ozone, allowing more
of the sun's ultraviolet rays to reach Earth, causing more skin
cancer and eye cataracts, and suppressing human immune systems.
   The recent General Accounting Office report called the decision
to rely on voluntary cooperation a course that would allow eventual
production of CFC alternatives ``by anyone, in any amount, and for
any use, without prior notification ... or an EPA safety review.''
   But the EPA's Rice countered, ``We feel using that cooperative
relationship is going to obtain the information we need on a much
quicker track.
   ``We have very great concern over toxicity testing'' Rice said,
adding that EPA has ``not ruled out'' using its full authority to
regulate the industry ``if we're not getting the cooperation we
need.''
   ``It's a question of how you do it as quickly as possible while
everyone is clamoring for new compounds as quickly as possible,''
said Kevin Fay, of the Alliance For Responsible CFC Policy,
representing CFC producers and users.
 ``The concern is you've got some policy makers in Congress
saying we've got to go faster, and you have regulatory structures
that would slow it down,'' he said, comparing the dilemma to
sitting at an intersection with both red and green lights.
   The Toxic Substances Control Act allows EPA not only to demand
industry's test results, but to order advance notice from any
company planning to convert chemicals designed for other use into
CFC substitutes.
   ``Given the importance of the safety issue, we believe that
EPA's approach to assessing the safety of CFC ... chemical
substitutes should include the use of (the) two TSCA authorities,''
the GAO said in a report requested by the chairman of the House
Energy and Commerce Committee, John D. Dingell, D-Mich.
   The GAO said dependence on voluntary cooperation is a mistake
because, ``EPA's previous attempt to gather testing information''
from CFC producers in December 1987 ``resulted in incomplete data.''
   By ordering the test results, EPA officials could determine if a
chemical presented ``an unreasonable health or environmental risk''
and if so, could require testing to determine the specific risks.
   If necessary, the agency could take actions ranging from
labeling requirements to a complete ban.
   Advance notice of new uses for chemicals would let EPA ``review
the safety of these new uses and quickly control'' any substances
posing a danger.
   If EPA determined the information was inadequate to ensure the
safety of the new use, the agency could require more testing and
prevent the new use while data is gathered.
   CFC's are used as coolants in refrigerators and freezers in
home, office and automobile air conditioners; propellants in
aerosols; blowing agents for plastic foam products and insulation;
cleaning agents for metals and electronic equipment; fast-food
cartons, and sterilizing agents for medical instruments.
   Related chemicals, halons are used in fire extinguishers where
foam or water treatment would not work: ships, planes, military
vehicles, computer facilities, telephone switching centers and
libraries.
   Substitutes for CFC's will be tested for at least two more years
before commercial production could begin, Fay said. No substitutes
have yet been found for halons.
