Preliminary tests suggest unhealthy levels of
radon in schools across the country, the Environmental Protection
Agency said Thursday in urging every school to test for the
odorless, cancer-causing gas.
``Based on measurements taken in 3,000 schoolrooms in 16 states,
it appears that elevated levels of radon gas can be found in
schools throughout the United States,'' EPA Administrator William
K. Reilly told a luncheon at the National Press Club.
The EPA said that 54 percent of 130 public schools tested in 41
communities had at least one room in which radon levels were found
to exceed 4 picocuries per liter of air, indicating a need for
additional tests and, likely, corrective action.
In 101 rooms tested at schools in five states, levels of at
least 20 picocuries per liter were found, comparable to what would
be found in uranium mines.
EPA spokeswoman Martha Casey said no list of the schools tested
was immediately available, but affected state authorities and
school officials have been told of the test results.
Reilly called indoor radon, the result of natural radioactive
decay in the ground, ``one of the major environmental health
threats facing Americans'' and urged that school officials
nationwide test their schoolrooms for the gas.
He said it is ``important that school administrators nationwide
understand both the seriousness of the risk and the relative
simplicity of testing and fixing the problem.''
There is no federal law requiring tests for the radioactive gas,
although the EPA by law is required to conduct sample tests
nationwide in homes and schools to determine potential health
threats. The preliminary findings from the 16 states came from
two-day tests in rooms normally occupied by students, teachers and
school staff, Ms. Casey said.
Last September, the EPA urged all homeowners to conduct radon
tests after unhealthy levels _ 4 picocuries per liter of air _ of
radon were found in one out of four homes tested in 17 states.
The agency has said that exposure over a lifetime at that level
is equivalent to smoking 10 cigarettes a day. The EPA said studies
have indicated indoor exposure to radon may cause up to 20,000 lung
cancer deaths a year, which would make such deaths second only to
those caused by smoking.
The latest EPA tests, although preliminary, indicate that
unhealthy radon levels in schools are at least as widespread as in
residences, although the agency emphasized that the levels may
range widely from school to school and even among rooms in the same
school.
Guimond estimated in an interview that from the data obtained in
the limited number of tests it is estimated that students in
probably 10 percent of the nation's schools are exposed to
long-term radon levels that exceed the 4 picocuries standard.
The EPA said that of the 3,000 schoolrooms tested, 19 percent
had levels of 4 picocuries or more and 3 percent had levels of at
least 20 picocuries.
The agency gave this breakdown of states with schoolrooms having
radon levels of at least 20 picocuries: Tennessee, 77 rooms;
Washington, 14; New Mexico, 7; Maine, 2, and Montana, 1.
The highest level was found in a schoolroom in Tennessee in
which 136 picocuries per liter of air were detected. Schools with
unusually high levels _ ranging from 25 to 98 picocuries per liter
of air in a single schoolroom _ were Washington (98 picocuries),
Montana (51), New Mexico (41) and Maine (25).
Richard Guimond, the EPA's director of radiation programs, said
such levels ``are not that unique'' at schools located in areas
where significant radon is present in the ground and where
ventilation systems often suck radon into buildings. ``When these
two things occur, you're going to get those high levels,'' he said.
Federal standards call for uranium miners to wear special
breathing equipment when working long periods in radon levels of 16
to 20 picocuries, said Guimond.
The other states in which schools were tested were were Nevada,
Wyoming, Colorado, North Dakota, Kansas, Minnesota, Missouri,
Illinois, Indiana, Georgia and New Jersey.
The agency said exposure levels are difficult to determine from
the test data because students in many schools move from room to
room during the day and because radon levels may vary widely among
the rooms in a school.
According to the agency, unhealthy radon levels also have been
found in EPA tests in schools in Virginia, Florida, Maryland,
Pennsylvania, New York, Ohio, and Iowa. Those findings were not
part of the latest study and no additional information was
available.
Radon is a naturally produced gas that is colorless, odorless
and tasteless. It is the product of the natural radioactive decay
of Radium-226 in the soil and rocks. While levels normally found
outdoors _ 0.2 to 0.7 picocurie per liter _ post no known dangers,
accumulated concentrations can be much higher indoors.
Scientists have said that the health risks of radon depend not
only on the concentration of radon at a given time, but also on the
length of exposure. Estimated health risks normally are based on
exposure over a lifetime.
The EPA estimates that as many as 15 percent of lung cancer
deaths annually may be related to radon exposure. While smoking
remains clearly the major cause of lung cancer, a combination of
heavy smoking and lifelong exposure to high levels of radon sharply
increases the chances of lung cancer, according to studies by the
National Acacemy of Sciences.
