National advocates believe New York's move to
restrict smoking in public buildings and the workplace statewide
will help them win over the rest of the nation.
   ``What happens in New York is definitely going to help the
movement across the country,'' said Angela Mickel of the
Tobacco-Free America project, a Washington D.C.-based organization
funded by the American Lung Association, the American Cancer Society
and the American Heart Association.
   With the signature of Gov. Mario Cuomo, expected sometime in the
next few days, the nation's second largest state will have one of
the nation's toughest laws limiting the places where people can
smoke.
   Of the 41 other states with some sort of smoking restrictions,
only Minnesota's law is tougher than the proposal expected to become
law in New York. California, for instance, restricts smoking in
government buildings, but not in private offices.
   ``California ... took the piecemeal approach,'' said Mickel.
``It's nothing like what New York's doing. New York is in a
different league.''
   Only Illinois, Virginia, North Carolina, Tennessee, Alabama,
Louisiana, Wyoming and Missouri have no form of statewide smoking
restrictions.
   The drive to restrict smoking has come amid scientific findings
that non-smokers could still contract lung and heart disease from
breathing other people's smoke.
   Recent studies indicate that as many as 5,000 non-smokers die of
lung cancer each year because of ``passive smoking.'' But a new
study says the toll, from heart disease and other forms of cancer,
may be 10 times that.
   Health groups said late last week that New York's impending law,
the result of a 13-year battle in the Legislature, will provide the
impetus needed to get the eight states without any smoking
restrictions to think about adding them.
   That may be a tall order in such places as North Carolina and
Virginia, the nation's top two tobacco states. Virginia, at the
behest of the tobacco industry, earlier this year imposed a one-year
moratorium on new local smoking ordinances, Mickel said. That came
after several cities and counties passed laws to restrict smoking.
   But the New York law could give courage to lawmakers in other
states, health advocates said.
   ``It really sets a trend and it gives us ammunition,'' said Diane
Maple of the American Lung Association. ``We can point to it as an
example.''
   Tobacco industry officials disagree and say other states won't
pay any attention to what's happening in New York.
   ``It sounds like wishful thinking on the part of the anti-smoking
community,'' said Tobacco Institute spokeswoman Brennan Dawson. ``I
think that each state is going to be fought very much on a
case-by-case basis. I don't think that the New York situation is
going to be any kind of bellwether.''
   The proposal before Cuomo would require employers in New York to
provide a smoke-free workplace for anyone who requests it and would
require restaurants to meet customer demand for no-smoking areas.
   It would ban smoking in auditoriums, elevators, gymnasiums,
retail food stores, classrooms, mass transit, taxicabs and ticketing
and boarding areas in public transportation terminals. In bowling
alleys, smoking would be prohibited in the bowling area.
   Smokers would be relegated to special sections of bingo halls,
hospitals, theaters, museums, libraries, shops, indoor arenas,
waiting rooms, banks, restrooms and service counters in food
establishments.
   The New York proposal would still allow smoking in bars and hotel
rooms; at conventions; and in private residences, limousines and
automobiles. You could smoke in private boxes at indoor arenas, at
private parties and in tobacco shops.
</TEXT>
</DOC>
