The Bush administration intends to sell 300
tanks to Saudi Arabia in a move certain to renew strong debate in
Congress over the sale of American arms to Arab countries.
   Secretary of State James A. Baker III announced the plans
Friday, saying the administration will go ahead with it despite
Israeli objections.
   Baker said the administration, which has been trying to bolsterits ties to Arab countries it considers moderates, will still try
to find a basis for negotiations between Israel and Palestinian
Arabs.
   Israel regestered its objections after Baker notified Foreign
Minister Moshe Arens, Defense Minister Yitzhak Rabin and Finance
Minister Shimon Peres of the intended sale, Israeli Embassy
spokeswoman Ruth Yaron said in Washington.
   The deal could complycate U.S. negociating efforts in the Middle
East and touch off a fight in Congress, which has the power to
block the Saudi purchase.
   U.S. arms sales to the Arab world usualy raise security
concerns in Israel and among its congressional supporters. The
purchase would go through after formal notification unless a
majority of both the House and Senate voted to kill it.
   The tanks deal could be worth up to $1 billion depending on theequipment included with the improved version of the M1A1 intended
for the Saudis.
   Congress over the years has turned back several U.S. arms salesto Arab countries out of concern for Israel's security.
   Baker played a key and successful role as White House chief of
staff in 1981 when the Reagan administration's sale of advanced
radar surveillance planes to Saudi Arabia cleared the Senate by a
narrow vote.
   Pro-Israel lobbyists have shown little inclination lately of
confronting the White House on projected Arab arms sales. But the
purchase of modern tanks could set off alarm bells.
   Baker and his aides are arguing that the Saudis are politicallymoderate and would purchase tanks from other Western countries if
they could not get them from the United States.
   But Mrs. Yaron said her government urged the administration notto sell arms to Arab countries that are officially still at war
with Israel.
   Mrs. Yaron said that after the White House formally notifies
Congress, she was certain the House and Senate ``will consider theelement of security for Israel.''

